---
title: Sorting Algorithms (Part 1)
date: 2024-02-16 14:16
categories: [Programming, Algorithm]
tags: [algorithm, programming, python, c++] # TAG names should always be lowercase
math: true
image: assets/img/algorithm/Background.jpg
---

**This is a fourth post in Algorithm series.**

## Introduction

Sorting is the process of arranging a collection of data in a particular order. The most common orders are numerical order and lexicographical order. Sorting is a fundamental operation in computer science and is used in many applications. For example, sorting is used to organize data for efficient searching, to prepare data for presentation, and to optimize data for storage and retrieval.

In this post, we'll discuss the algorithms for sorting an array. There are many sorting algorithms, but in this post, I will introduce the two most popular algorithms:

1.  **Bubble Sort**
2.  **Insertion Sort**

## Bubble Sort

Bubble sort is probably the simplest sorting algorithm. It works by repeatedly stepping through the list, comparing each pair of adjacent items, and swapping them if they are in the wrong order. The pass through the list is repeated until the list is sorted.

Assume there is an unsorted array `arr = [32, 1, 9, 6]` and we want to sort it in ascending order.

Bubble Sort will work as follows:

1.  Compare the first two elements of the array. If the first element is greater than the second element, swap them.

```
[32, 1, 9, 6] -> [1, 32, 9, 6]
```

2. Compare the second and third elements of the array. If the second element is greater than the third element, swap them.

```
[1, 32, 9, 6] -> [1, 9, 32, 6]
```

3. Compare the third and fourth elements of the array. If the third element is greater than the fourth element, swap them.

```
[1, 9, 32, 6] -> [1, 9, 6, 32]
```

4. Repeat the process until the array is sorted.

```
[1, 9, 6, 32] -> [1, 9, 6, 32] (1 < 9)
[1, 9, 6, 32] -> [1, 6, 9, 32] (9 > 6)
[1, 6, 9, 32] -> [1, 6, 9, 32] (9 < 32)
```

### Performance

The time complexity of the bubble sort algorithm is ${O(n^2)}$.

In the worst case, the algorithm will have to repeat the sorting process $n^2$ times, where $n$ is the number of elements in the list.

- pros:
  - It is simple and easy to implement.
  - It is effective for small datasets.
- cons:
- It is not the most efficient algorithm.
- It may take a long time for large datasets.

### Pseudocode

The pseudocode for the bubble sort algorithm is as follows:

```
function bubble_sort(list):
    for each element in the list:
        for each adjacent pair of elements:
            if the first element is greater than the second element:
                swap the elements
```

### Implementation

Here is a simple implementation of the bubble sort algorithm:

```cpp
void bubble_sort(int arr[], int size;){
    for(int i = 0; i < size; i++){
        for(int j = 0; j < size - i - 1; j++){
            if(arr[j] > arr[j + 1]){
                int temp = arr[j];
                arr[j] = arr[j + 1];
                arr[j + 1] = temp;
            }
        }
    }
}
```

```python
def bubble_sort(arr):
    length = len(arr) - 1
    for i in range(length):
        for j in range(length - i):
            if arr[j] > arr[j + 1]:
                arr[j], arr[j + 1] = arr[j + 1], arr[j]
    return arr
```

Note that the length is len(arr) - 1, and the range is length - i.
This is because we are comparing arr[j] and arr[j + 1], and we don't want to compare the last element with the element after it. `len(arr) - 1` prevents the comparison going out of range.
After each pass, the largest element will be at the end of the array, so we don't need to compare it again. `length - i` prevents the comparison of the sorted elements.

### Application

Bubble sort is not the most efficient algorithm, yet it can be used for datasets consisting of data types that are not numeric, such as strings or characters.

Bubble sort is a **Stable sort**, which means that the relative order of equal elements is preserved in the sorted output.

## Insertion Sort

Insertion sort is a simple sorting algorithm that works the way we sort playing cards in our hands. It works by building a sorted array one element at a time.

Imagine there are two bundles of cards. One bundle is sorted, and the other is not. We pick one card from the unsorted bundle and insert it into the correct position in the sorted bundle. We repeat this process until the unsorted bundle is empty.

Assume there is an unsorted array `arr = [6, 5, 8, 2]` and we want to sort it in ascending order.

Insertion Sort will work as follows:

1.  We start with the second element of the array, and we compare it with the first element. If the second element is smaller than the first element, we swap them.

```
[6, 5, 8, 2] -> [5, 6, 8, 2] (6 > 5)
```

2. Next, we compare the third element with the second element

```
[5, 6, 8, 2] -> [5, 6, 8, 2] (6 < 8)
```

There is no need to compare the third element with the first element because the first and second elements are already sorted.

3. We compare the fourth element with the third element

```
[5, 6, 8, 2] -> [5, 6, 2, 8] (8 > 2)
```

We compare the fourth element with the second element

```
[5, 6, 2, 8] -> [5, 2, 6, 8] (6 > 2)
```

We compare the fourth element with the first element

```
[5, 2, 6, 8] -> [2, 5, 6, 8] (5 > 2)
```

4. The array is sorted.

### Performance

The time complexity of the insertion sort algorithm is ${O(n^2)}$.

In the worst case, the algorithm will have to repeat the sorting process $n^2$ times, where $n$ is the number of elements in the list.

Although the time complexity of the insertion sort algorithm is the same as the bubble sort algorithm, the insertion sort algorithm is more efficient than the bubble sort algorithm.

If the array is mostly sorted, the insertion sort will perform much faster than the bubble sort.

- pros:
  - It is simple and easy to implement.
  - It is effective for small datasets.
  - It is more efficient than the bubble sort algorithm.
- cons:
- It is not the most efficient algorithm.
- It may take a long time for large datasets.

### Pseudocode

The pseudocode for the insertion sort algorithm is as follows:

```
function insertion_sort(list):
    for each element in the list:
        value = the element
        while the index is greater than 0 and the previous element is greater than the value:
            move the previous element to the next position
            decrease the index
```

### Implementation

Here is a simple implementation of the insertion sort algorithm:

```cpp
void insertion_sort(int arr[], int size){
    for(int i = 1; i < size; i++){
        int value = arr[i];
        int j = i - 1;
        while(j >= 0 && arr[j] > value){ //if the previous element is greater
            arr[j + 1] = arr[j]; // the next element is replaced with the previous value
            j--;
        }
        arr[j + 1] = value; // the temporary value is placed in the correct position
    }
}
```

```python
def insertion_sort(arr):
    for i in range(1, len(arr)):
        value = arr[i]
        j = i - 1 # j is the previous index
        while j >= 0 and arr[j] > value:
            arr[i] = arr[j]
            i -= 1
        arr[i] = value
```

### Application

Insertion sort is a simple and efficient algorithm for small datasets. It is also used in practice for datasets that are mostly sorted.

Insertion sort is a **Stable sort**, which means that the relative order of equal elements is preserved in the sorted output.
